---
title: "Developing AI assistants to perform transdisciplinary action research for community economic development"
author: "Bradley Venner"
draft: true
tags: []
---

The phrase "developing AI agents to assist with transdisciplinary action research for community economic development" is an abstraction from the more concrete goal of "developing AI agents to assist with research on make-or-buy decisions for workplace cooperatives". While I agree that original development focus should be on the more concrete category, I believe that keeping the more abstract goal in mind may help improve early design decisions and may also help with early-stage fundraising. 

## From make or buy decisions for workplace cooperatives to community economic development

When we explained the proposed product to Marie, she recommended that we broaden the intended scope to community economic development. She believed that our focus on modeling economic opportunities for workplace cooperatives was already being done by local/municipal economic planning agencies. Connecting early with these agencies would help us avoid developing a tool that was already in-place. Local agencies may also have better data than what is available to the public.

Somewhat coincidentally, the Scottish Parliament passed the (*Community Wealth Building Act*)[https://www.parliament.scot/bills-and-laws/bills/s6/community-wealth-building-scotland-bill] on 25 March 2026. Community wealth building is a particular approach to community economic development that focuses on keeping resources within a community. There are five general pillars to the approach. For our purposes, the most important is "inclusive ownership," which develops local businesses that generate community wealth, including social enterprises, employee owned firms and cooperatives. Although it's too early to tell if the Act will be successful, it does imply that thinking more broadly around the role of workplace cooperatives within a more broad community wealth building approach could eventually access a larger market.

The concept of community wealth building has been around for over 20 years. It was originally developed by the Democracy Collaborative in 2005 and implemented in the (*Cleveland Model*)[]. It was most famously taken up by the (Centre for Local Economies)[https://cles.org.uk/expertise/community-wealth-building/]   

Since I have the most background in the electricity sector, a concrete example here may help.

### Experience with a "recursive" research assistant process

On May 3, 2026, I engaged an Opencode-based research process using the Kimi 2.6 reasoning language model on the project to develop a plan to develop a "community wealth building" research assistant. I used a collection of research assistant skills that I downloaded from Github. The way this assistant collection works is that a higher-level research agent develops a step-wise plan to perform the research task and then engages a number of "deep research agents" that perform web searches and developed detailed JSON-based summaries of the web searches that they perform. The higher-level research agent then synthesizes the JSON files into an research product. The research agent interacted with me about the intended format of the product and I asked it to develop Markdown files in the format of collection of SKILL.md files. 

I was both very impressed at the final products and yet somewhat underwhelmed. I believe that this was partly due to the limitations in the research assistant itself. The research plan contained a number of suggestions to use graph databases, PDF processing, and other existing tools to help with the research project. Many of these "ideas" were very helpful. But I had the sense that more progress could have been made if the research assistant itself had access to these tools. Part of the issue was the sense that I had that the tool was using very shallow understandings of different techniques and the resulting design seemed somewhat fragmented. 

The other impression that I had was that it was not a good idea to make an *a priori* commitment to the community wealth building process. I think it would be a great idea to have this as a "skill" that the agent could use. But many of the suggested implementation ideas that were developed by the tool were uninspired. It struck me that the ideas were not leveraging the capabilities of agentic AI to reimagine and improve existing processes. For example, the tool suggested developing a workplace cooperative for a local laundry service that would serve the needs of a hospital. This suggestion would merely implement an existing process and relation to a contractor with a local-based substitute. But merely dropping in workplace cooperatives into an existing anchor institution does not fundamentally change the approach to community health. The community wealth-building process is too constrained by capitalist thinking in preserving exchange value and does not directly engage in improving use value. Community economic development should focus on improving "provisioning institutions." The CWB approach implicitly accepts the fundamental institution of the market and ignores the potential for non-market solutions. It has a "new institutional economics" flavor that begs the question of the most important institution.

I've also been looking at the "governing knowledge commons" approach that is based upon Ostrom's "institutional analysis and design" framework. There is a family resemblance of institutional analysis and design to the transdisciplinary framework proposed in Rousseau's proposed "architecture of systemology and the typology of its principles". The latter has stages called "research" and "design"; the latter can be understood as a generalization of Ostrom's "analysis". The systemology framework also includes an earlier stage "reflection" and a later stage "intervention". This four-stage framework resembles a reordered ISO process framework of "act-check-plan-do"; placing "act" as the first stage resembles pragmatism as the spur to action is a breakdown in the "do" stage that causes doubt that is the spur to reflection. 

