---
title: "Open Energy Analysis Project Notes"
author: "Brad Venner"
date: "02/23/2024"
format: html
---

# Choice of open-source modeling tool

Does it make sense to leave the choice of tool to a procurement contract? It depends on whether "stakeholders" are driving this contract

# Co-design

# Transformations between OEM tools

Coarse- and fine-grained transformations of energy systems.

Tools like PyPSA and Sienna specify the electricity network and then allow multiple approaches to "solving" the network.

Other tools are more "optimization" focused where a physically solvable electricity network is not really developed. 

# Coupled weather-energy system modeling

Weather-synchronized simulation requires high-resolution weather data but that depends upon climate and load reaction to climate.

# All the tools

Multi-physics tools

Distributed control tools

Multi-agent tools

# Weather Dataset Needs

Zane Selvans recommended this paper [@ESIG:2022:weather].

Google has developed a deep learning weather model called MetNet, with MetNet-3 being the latest version. 

Could the MetNet architecture be applied to  

It appears that MetNet is completely independent from numerical weather prediction. This makes it 

# Democratic energy planning

Energy democracy and democratic energy planning seem synonymous, like "social democracy" and "democratic socialism". But word order does matter, and there is something like a parallel construct here. The first term, "energy democracy", is often understood as a 